arsed - Mildly inconvenienced; "I couldn't be arsed to go at dat now!"
barge - A large boat that served as an ancillary craft in the fishery from schooners; "Tie the barge up at da warf!"
batch - A quantity of anything coming at a time; "Thur's a fresh batch of nan's buns comin' out of da oven!"
beach - A level stretch of sea-worn rocks along the shore that was convient to use for drying and salting fish; "Dry those filets on the beach!"
blank - An unsuccessful fishing season; "She was blank this year, caught almost nothing'"
blare - Of a cow, moose to howl or bellow; "You shoulda heard the friggin' blare come out of that moose when she thought her calf was gone!"
blast - A quick burning fire fed by dried twigs or boughs; "Layer the splits right over the blast(y) boughs and she'll light right up!"
block - In lumbering,the area to be logged or cut; "We were lucky to get such a wicked block this season."
blood - A part of cod flesh that adheres to the bone; "Nan loves the blood of the cod!"
blush - *sheila's blush/brush is the firce storm that happens around St. Patrick's day; "You know sheila's brush is coming this weekend, wear yer parka cause you'll be linin' up to the pub!"
bough - The end of a branch terminating in twigs; "Blasty boughs are best for sgettin a fire going!"
bride - *bride's boys were the men who assisted for a wedding; "Tell those bride's boys to put that table up here!"
bring - *bring to During the winter, fishermen would 'bring them to' their nets by fitting them with new head and foot ropes; "I'll bring them nets too."
cabin - An often rustic dwelling meant for temporary occuation; "I loves gettin' out o town and up to the cabin!"
capon - *caplin, capelan, capellin, caplain A small irrescent deep-water fish whose spawning was netted and used for food, bait and manure; "The garbage weather in June means the capon are rolling."
catch - Number of fish caugt; "What was the catch today Skipper?"
chain - *chaining off a fishing operation connected with fishing in the ice on boats without hydraulic ice davits; "Chain off that warf!"
chair - *chair box Kitchen chair made out of a box or barrel; "Young ones can sit on the boxes, save the proper chairs for Nan!"
charm - To cure a medical aliment by para-medical means; "Misses up the road will make you a charm that will cure what ails ya."
cheek - Fleshy part of a cod's head; "There's nuddin' better than a feed of cod cheeks!"
chovy - *choby, copy, chuffy, shovy Pices of kindling wood shavedS with a knife so the wood curls at the sides; "Shave off a bit of chovy to get the fire started."
chook - *chooky, chuck, chucky A call to pigs; "Chook, chook, chook....here's yer dinner!"
chaff - Bits of wood shavings and chips useful for starting fires; "Make sure you use a fair bit of chaff 'cause the wood is a tad damp."

clean - In logging, to cut all the trees in a given cutting area; "This whole area will soon be clean so we can put the cabin up here."
cloth - cloth pudding: pudding made of flour and water, sometimes with raisins added, boiled in a cloth bag: duff; "I needs a cloth bag for the figgy duff."
coach - *coach box A box for a passenger on a komatik; "She looks  mighty comfy on that coach!"
coast - *costal fishery Cod fishery carried out in coastal waters; "We're called inshore harvesters 'cause we fish just off the coast."
dally - Sudden lull or  slackeng of wind or a shift in the wind's direction; "Did you feel that dally?  Storm must be brewing."
dandy - *dandy longlegs , daddy longlegs; Very large flying insect that arrvied near summer's end. Also used as a name to call tall people; "The cat is gone mad over the dandy longlegs!"
darts - Cigarettes. Also a quick visit or sudden movement; "Run up to the shop and get me a pack of darts will ya?"
dicky - A wollen bib worn by children. Also a mock turtleneck; "Your white dicky under that sweater will look some smart!"
dinky - Small toy car; "Can you buy me a blue Mustang dinky at the store?"
dirty - Resentful; "That's some dirty look she's giving him!"
dishy - *dishy looking A person looking pale or sickly in complexion; "Don't know why you're so into him...sure he's right dishy!"
ditty - *ditties, diddies Nightmare; restlessness in one's sleep; "Some tired today...had the friggin' ditties all night."
dodge - To travel but without urgency; "Let's dodge on over to Lars for a custard cone!"
drove - Annoyed and nearing limits of patience; "Youngsters got me friggin' drove today!"
every - *every way's likely: Anything can happen, even the unexpected; "It's every way's likely that you'll succeed if you put your mind to it!"
edger - A circular saw by which the bark is ripped fom slab-boards; "Use the edger to tidy up those slabs."
egger - Person who plunders the nests of sea-birds for the eggs; "Watch out for that egger...always stealing the baby puffins!"
elson - *elisinor, elsanor A cap, oftern made of leather, with ear flaps; "Wear your elson to keep your ears warm!"
fairy - *fairy-struck mentally or physically harmed by the nafarious fairies who dwelled in the woods; "Best be home before dark so the faires don't get ya!"
figgy - *figgy duff pudding made with raisins and cooked in a bag; "Loves a good figgy duff after a feed of jigs!"
flash - A flexible strip of animal hide at the end of a dog-whip; "You'll be gettin' a trimming from the flash if you don't mind your manners!"
fleet - Two or more fishing nets strung together; "He uses fleets of three when he's fishing."
float - A lead weight forming part of a hook, used when fishing with a hand-line near the surface; "He uses a heavier float than most."
floor - A straight piece of wood used to join the body-frame timbers across the bottom of the craft, in boat-building,; "You swant to use the best slabs for the floor og her."
flood - *flood-gate: one of a number of openings on each side of a vessel permitting water to drain overboard from the deck; "Be sure you knows where the flood gates are so you don't get swept overboard!"
fresh - The unsalted flesh of birds or animals eaten fresh."You never salt the fresh part of the cod!"
frost - *frostburn An injury of the flesh caused by exposure to freezing temperatures; "Make sure you're bundled up as tonight's temps cause frost-bite in minutes!"
gache - *gatch,gauch A person displaying swaggering behavior with a popmus gait is called a gatcher; "Look at the gache on him...thinks he's all that!"
gaffs - To pull a fish from the water with a hook fastened to a short stick; "He uses the gaffs for grabbing the fish from the line."
glean - To laugh covertly; "We all glean when he says 'supurlative' instead of 'perogative'."
grand - *grand bank(s) A large area of shoal water southeast of Newfoundland forming a rich fishing-ground; "The grand banks have the world's greatest cod stocks."
grass - Mature hay ready to be dried for fodder; "We keeps the best fooder for d' horses."
growl - A game of cards, sometimes known as 120; "She loves goin' 30 for 60 on nothing on a game of growl!"
gully - A small pond or series of linked ponds forming the head waters of a stream, or adjacent to a larger body of water; "I like to drop a line in the gully just past the main pond."
habit - Headress worn by Catholic nuns; "Sister Mary's habit is always perfect."

heart - The instep of a boot or shoe; "The heart is flexible on these shoes so they'll be better for your wide feet."
hoble - A job outside of one's usual work hours usually paid with cash; "I got a hoble this weekend puttin' in a hot water boiler for my Aunt."
hooky - Liable to snag or hook (an object); "Mind your sweater on that wall, she's all full of hooky splinters."
hovel - A shed for cattle or pigs; out-house of any kind; "We can't keep it in the house so put him out in da hovel!"
inner - Inshore, nearer the land; "We'll fish the inner part of the bay."
irish - Of Irish desent; "Her people are all Irish...just look at all of dat red hair!"
jacky - Long-legs 'a large gnat'; "Watch those weeds...filled with jacky!"
janny - Another word for a mummer; "Who's that janny over there with the apon on his head?"
jenny - Female harlequin duck; "Did you see how the lab went after that jenny?"
junky - Thick, chunky; "He's a little junky around the middle cause he likes a nip or two."
kedgy - *ketchie, kedgie A young boy taken on a ship to help with general duties; "I got the nephew on as kedgy this season."
keels - The game of ninepins, skittles or ball and hurley; "Come over after lunch and we'll have a gamw of keels."
labry - A narrow wooden covered walkway, often forming part of a network of passages, connecting different parts of a fishing stage; "We're putting up a new labry to join the two stages."
laggy - *leggy A small codfish, gutted, headed, salted and dried without being split; "One laggy is not enough to feed two people."
lammy - A short or three-quarter-length denim or leather coat, lined with sheep's or lamb's wool; "I got my misses a new lammy coat for Christmas...she'll look some sharpe!"
lassy - To spread (food) with molasses; "I loves a drop of lassy on my touton!"
leaky - Inflammation of hand or wrist caused by exposure to salt water; "That salt got my whole wrist gone leaky....some sore!"
leery - A short story told in great [circumstantial] detail; "He spins a good leery but you got to mind what he says."
licky - *lickery Of a conifer, esp fir, exuding resin or sap; "He likes to chew the licky of a fir."
light - *light-cured dried cod-fish prepared for market with application of minimum amount of salt; "I prefer light-cured cod for my fish and brewis." 
local - Ice formed in the bays and harbours; "Too many local growlers to get out today."
lodge - To place (an object) in a position; to set down on a surface; "Lodge that in right there!"
lolly - Soft ice forming in water; loose ice or snow floating in water; "The harbour is blocked with lolly today!"
loppy - Seas rough from wind or storm; "I wouldn't put a conoe out today misses, she's awful loppy!"
manus - The act of mutiny of a sealing crew; "All hands'll go manus if we insist on staying out with no lassy on board."
mauzy - Damp, foggy, or misty weather sometimes with very light rain and a cool, gentle wind off the sea; "She's right mauzy out today, don't even need a coat."
merry - *merry dancers The northern lights, aurora borealis  
marry - To wed; "She's going to marry him next spring."
mosey - To walk or move in a leisurely manner; "I'll mosey on over after dinner"
munge - To munch, chew; "Go have a munge of mudder's homemade jerkey...she's deadly!"
natch - *notch, netch To cut notches in; to gash; "He tripped on the sidewalk and has a giant natch on his leg."
naked - An old, decayed, leafless tree; "Don't expect that tree to bloom, it's been naked for years."
nitch - *knitch A number of pieces of bark removed from spruce, birch or fir trees and carried on the shoulder; esp a bundle of ten pieces; "Grab that nitch of birch and bring it here will ya?"
nifty - Adjective describing someone's smart and tidy appearance; "She's looking nify in those slacks and blouse!"
noddy - To drag a heavy object on the ground; "Just noddy the dresser over to the left."
nonia - The Newfoundland Outport Nursing and Industrial Association, known as Nonia, did pioneer work in providing nursing services for the outports; "The NONIA nurse is coming next week to check on me."
nunch - Snack taken between any of the main meals, esp in the woods or while fishing; "I gotta nice big sausage for nunch t'day!"
ochre - A red type of the used by the Beothuk to paint their bodies, homes, canoes and weapons; "The Beothuks were sometimes called (*cringes) The Red Ochre Indians."
outer - Offshore, away from the land; "We fish on the outer part of the bay."
order - A term used to describe when a ship was prepared and ready; "The ship is in order Captain!"
patch - A group of seals; "There's a patch on that slab over there."
pease - One of three kinds of figgy duffs: a figgy one, a plain one and pease duff; "I'll have a pease duff instaed of a figgy with jiggs this Sunday."
pinch - A steep or difficult part of a road; "Make sure you slow down long before you get to that opinch before O'Reilly's house!"
pitch - To fall (from a height); "Mind the edge so you dont't pitch and break something!"
pitty - *pitty-hole A grave parents threatened their naighty children with; "If you don't get in here right now, you'll be put in the pitty-hole!"
poppy - An extract of the buds of the yellow pond-lily used as a home remedy; "Nan'll make you a poltice out of the poppy from the lilly-pads. It'll cure what ails ya."
porch - A room attached to a house, usually at the back, often adjoining the kitchen and used for various storage purposes; "You can sit together on the porch but there's no boys coming in the house!"
pooky - Shaped like a haycock; "Have a look at this pooky carrot I just pulled up!"
pound - To divide an enclosed space into compartments for storage; to partition; "Pound that closet area into three seperate closets."
press - To place split and salted cod-fish in a 'pile' at various stages of the curing and drying process; "Press the salted ones there at the end of the stage."
prime - The codtrap berths were graded choice, prime, seconds, and fly, in that order; "The prime part of the trap'll give you the best catch."
queak - The gentle squeak of the young of small animals; "I love hearing the queak of the lambs."
quiff - Man's soft felt hat with brim; fedora; "Buddy there looks some handsome in his quiff!"
quoit - To skip flat stones over the surface of the water; "Loves going to quoit a few rocks on the pond!"
raise - To start or lead a tune; "Raise us off on Heave Away will ya?"
ramey - Thin, like a skeleton; "My god the size of her...right ramey, down to nothing!"
randy - Boisterous play, esp a ride on a sled or in a vehicle or boat; "Don't go getting too randy on that machine now!"
rawny - Cloth that is flimsy  and threadbare; "You're not wearing that ramey old shirt to mass!  Go put something decent on."
rhind - *rind, rine The bark of a tree or plant; "The rhind of a pine tree is deadly for starting a fire!"
rhode - *road, rode; A rope for securing an anchor; "Grab ahold of that rhode will ya?"
rivel - To unweave, unravel; Just rivel it then wind it up again properly'
rough -  Turbulent weather with high-winds and heavy, drifting snow; "She's looking pretty rough out there this evening!"
rouse - To throw oneself with vigour and energy into an activity; "If I don't rouse a sport, than I don't play."
rusty -  Second-year harp seals  are 'rusties,' or 'rusty jackets';"Will ya look at the rusties on that sheet?"
sabot - *sawboo Big, clumsy shoe or boot; "Now where are you gonna go with that foolish ole sabot on?"
sagger - A good boat-load of fish
sally - To move from side to side; to sway a boat; "Don't sallt the boat with Mudder in it...she'll get right tangly wit ya!"
salty - Cantankerous; "He's that salty that I can't stand to be handy to him!"
scabs - Workers who replace union workers during a labour disput; "Look at that bunch of scabs crossing the picket line!"
scoff - A cooked meal at sea or ashore, esp at night and often part of an impromptu party
scrag - A disheveled or unkempt person, usually female; "Don't you go dating her, she's a scrag!"
scuff - A dance held at someone's house; "Loves getting together for a scuff and a scoff!"  (Dinner and dance)
scoop - A flat-bottomed wooden container with short handle used to bail water from a boat; "Hurry up and grab the scoop before she gets too much water in her!"
scoot - A small vehicle used by children for sliding on snow; "Grab your scoot and we'll go for a slide!"
scout - Children's chasing game; "The youngsters are out in the backyard playng scout...Jack is it."
scram - *scrawn, scran Scram-bag: canvas bag in which fisherman carries his day's food; "Jack's Misses always puts at least three sammies in his scram."
scrap - A fight; "If he doesn't stop flirting with my misses, there's going to be a scrap!"
scrob - A scratch in one's flesh (v) the action of scratching; "Look at the scrob I got from that cat!"
scrag - An indicator that a girl is dissheveled and has a bad reputation; "Don't go crushing on her, she's some scrag!"
shits - Unacceptable or undesirable; "This room is the shits!"
shack - In lumbering operations, to live in a small, roughly made dwelling; to cook and care for oneself in the 'lumber woods' or in a cheap dwelling; "He lives in a little shack in the back during the summer."
shaul - *shall, shaw To remove a husk; "Go and shaul that corn will ya?"
sheer - To swing a boat (by a length of rope) into a desired position; "Sheer that boat over there next to the yellow dory."
sheet - *sheet ice a stretch of flat, thin ice formed locaquented by seals; "Just look at the load of seals on that sheet!"
shift - To change one's clothing, boots, etc; "Go on and shift out of those wet boots!"
shoal - A vessel having a shallow draught;"Who owns that shoal over there?"
shoot - To place or set a net or fishing line in position in the water;"Shhot that line out right there, will ya?"
shuck - To slip down in the water; "Just shuck down off the warf and you'll be fine."
sieve - *cive, scyve A variety of small onion or onion-sprout; "Loves a bit of sieve in the dressing I do!"
skate - To throw flat stones over the surface of water; "I loves to skate rocks when the water is this flat!"
skeet - An ill-reputed character often known to seek wealth without training or skill; "Buddy over there looks like some skeet!"
snare - A wire device used for catching rabbit; "I gotta go check the snare set out behind the house."
soddy - Beneath proper size; "Those lobster are some soddy...won't get much for them"
sooky - Whining, petulant; jealous; "The sooky little younster is always going on about something!"
souse - To go plunging in water; "Go and souse him after the game!"
split - A thin piece of wood, about twelve to fourteen inches (30-36 cm) long, used chiefly as kindling; "Hand me that split over there!"
spicy - Attractive and slightly naughty;"misses there looks some spicy in them jeans!"
squat - To crush, bruise; squeeze; flatten; "I'd squat the cheeks right off that baby!"
squid - To fish with or for squid; "We're off to catch a few feed of squid!"
steam - To immerse (a plank, rail or timber) in steam in order to bend it into a desired curve or shape; "We steamed those planks to shape 'em for the dory."
steel - To sharpen a knife on a special steel rod; "Steel that blade 'til she's good and sharp."
strap - To hoist an object on a vessel using a band of rope as a purchase for tackle
stump - To dress in shorter clothes; "She prefers to drss stump so the by's can see her gorgeous gams."
tabby - To jump from one floating ice-pan to another; "They likes to play tabby when the ice is in."
taint - To remove hair from animal skins by storing in a warm, moist place for a few days; "go and Taint that pelt!"
taker - In the game of marbles, a marble or ally pitched so close to that of an opponent that ownership can be claimed
tally - In keeping account of the number of seal pelts, dried cod, etc, being handled, the last of a sequence of numbers, esp five, forming a single group
tansy - The leaves of the common yarrow, an infusion of which is used in home-remedies and cooking
tatie - *tatey, teddy, tetty, tiddy, titty Potato; "Loves ne a feed of tatie!
twack - To look at goods, inquire about prices, but make no purchase; "Come on we goes out twacking this morning."
thawt - To lay (a thing) athwart or across; "lay that board thawt the other one!"
thick - Of the weather, with restricted visibility; dense with fog, mist, rain or snow; "Thatn fog is some thick...just like pea soup!"
theif - Newfoundland grey jay;"Just look at that little thief stealing from the other birdds!"
thorn - A spine or spiny process in an animal; "Watch out for them thorns on his sides!"
tipsy - To jump from one floating ice-pan to another; The effects of consuming too many spirits or wine; "By's I'm right tipsy after that last glass!"
tissy - Angry, irritable; "You've got yourself worked up to a tissy!"
torch - *torch night The night before Bonfire Night when it started to get dark you would see boys 10-15 years of age roaming the roads and lanes with torches lit; "Are we going out for torch night this year?"
towny - A native of St John's, esp a male, usually derisive and contrasting with bay men
tramp - To walk clumsily, Perosn od disrepute; "Don't le yer mudder see you with that tramp!"
trout - Fishing for trout; "Loves to trouto for a feed!"
twack - To look at goods, inquire about prices, but make no purchase; "Come on we goes for a twack to pass the time."
uncle - Title of an older man, used with first or full name; general term of respect used of an older man in the community; "Uncle Jack is good to go, always there to help."
wabby - A red-throated loon; "Just listen to that wabby on the pond!"
watch - One of the groups of men on a sealing vessel; "By's who's on next watch?"
water - To immerse split and salted cod in water in preparation for drying; "Go and water those fish "

young - Of various species of seal, designating an animal before breeding age; "Leave that harp, she's too young"
